## Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)


During the year there was a threefold increase in the number of IDPs--from approximately 50,000 to an estimated 150,000 (almost 4 percent of the population)--due to fighting between government security forces and rebel groups, as well as attacks on civilians by rebels, armed bandits, and government soldiers. These attacks reportedly resulted in the killing and rape of civilians, the burning of villages, and looting (see sections 1.a. and 1.c.). Displacement occurred throughout the year, and the overwhelming majority of IDPs were in the northwestern prefectures of Ouham (bordering Chad) and Ouham Pende (bordering Chad and Cameroon), where civilians abandoned their villages out of fear and lived in the bush for much of the year, surviving on little more than roots and wild food. Starting in October, thousands of individuals fled their homes due to fighting in the north-central prefectures of Gribingui and Bamingui-Bangoran (both of which border Chad) and the northeastern prefecture of Vakaga (which borders Sudan and Chad). By October the UN estimated that one million citizens, particularly IDPs, had been affected by "severe levels of violence" during the year. In addition to hygiene-related illness, chronic malnutrition increased as insecurity prevented many subsistence farmers from planting crops, and the majority of livestock was either looted or migrated to safety in neighboring Cameroon. The absence of security also rendered the northwestern region largely inaccessible to humanitarian organizations, contributing to the lack of proper medical care, food security, and school facilities.

CEMAC peacekeepers conducted joint security operations in an effort to secure the northern region of CAR and control the proliferation of small arms. Despite these operations, however, the government was not able to provide a sufficient degree of security or protection for IDPs in the northern part of the country.

In June Prime Minister Elie Dote led a "peace mission" to the northwestern subprefecture of Paoua, the site of retribution attacks on civilians by security forces early in the year (see section 1.a.), and made an appeal for IDPs to return to their homes and help build a stable region. However, many critics argued that the government needed to make more efforts to provide security and key infrastructure and services.

